Tell me, O Muse, of that ingenious hero who travelled far
and wide after he had sacked the famous town of Troy.
Many cities did he visit, and many were the nations with
whose manners and customs he was acquainted; moreover
he suffered much by sea while trying to save his own life
and bring his men safely home; but do what he might he
could not save his men, for they perished through their own
sheer folly in eating the cattle of the Sun-god Hyperion; so
the god prevented them from ever reaching home. Tell me,
too, about all these things, oh daughter of Jove, from whatsoever source you may know them.
So now all who escaped death in battle or by shipwreck
had got safely home except Ulysses, and he, though he was
longing to return to his wife and country, was detained by 
14 The Odyssey
the goddess Calypso, who had got him into a large cave and
wanted to marry him. But as years went by, there came a
time when the gods settled that he should go back to Ithaca;
even then, however, when he was among his own people,
his troubles were not yet over; nevertheless all the gods had
now begun to pity him except Neptune, who still persecuted him without ceasing and would not let him get home.
Now Neptune had gone off to the Ethiopians, who are at
the world’s end, and lie in two halves, the one looking West
and the other East. {1} He had gone there to accept a hecatomb of sheep and oxen, and was enjoying himself at his
festival; but the other gods met in the house of Olympian
Jove, and the sire of gods and men spoke first. At that moment he was thinking of Aegisthus, who had been killed by
Agamemnon’s son Orestes; so he said to the other gods:
‘See now, how men lay blame upon us gods for what is
after all nothing but their own folly. Look at Aegisthus; he
must needs make love to Agamemnon’s wife unrighteously and then kill Agamemnon, though he knew it would be
the death of him; for I sent Mercury to warn him not to do
either of these things, inasmuch as Orestes would be sure
to take his revenge when he grew up and wanted to return
home. Mercury told him this in all good will but he would
not listen, and now he has paid for everything in full.’
